Preface
33
and maintained our new Core i7 box. Michael Kozuch, Babu Pillai, and Jason
Campbell provided valuable insight on memory system performance, multi-core
systems, and the power wall. Phil Gibbons and Shimin Chen shared their consid-
erable expertise on solid state disk designs.
We have been able to call on the talents of many, including Wen-Mei Hwu,
Markus Pueschel, and Jiri Simsa, to provide both detailed comments and high-
level advice. James Hoe helped us create a Verilog version of the Y86 processor
and did all of the work needed to synthesize working hardware.
Many thanks to our colleagues who provided reviews of the draft manu-
script: James Archibald (Brigham Young University), Richard Carver (George
Mason University), Mirela Damian (Villanova University), Peter Dinda (North-
western University), John Fiore (Temple University), Jason Fritts (St. Louis Uni-
versity), John Greiner (Rice University), Brian Harvey (University of California,
Berkeley), Don Heller (Penn State University), Wei Chung Hsu (University of
Minnesota), Michelle Hugue (University of Maryland), Jeremy Johnson (Drexel
University), Geoff Kuenning (Harvey Mudd College), Ricky Liu, Sam Mad-
den (MIT), Fred Martin (University of Massachusetts, Lowell), Abraham Matta
(Boston University), Markus Pueschel (Carnegie Mellon University), Norman
Ramsey (Tufts University), Glenn Reinmann (UCLA), Michela Taufer (Univer-
sity of Delaware), and Craig Zilles (UIUC).
Paul Anagnostopoulos of Windfall Software did an outstanding job of type-
setting the book and leading the production team. Many thanks to Paul and his
superb team: Rick Camp (copyeditor), Joe Snowden (compositor), MaryEllen N.
Oliver (proofreader), Laurel Muller (artist), and Ted Laux (indexer).
Finally, we would like to thank our friends at Prentice Hall. Marcia Horton has
always been there for us. Our editor, Matt Goldstein, provided stellar leadership
from beginning to end. We are profoundly grateful for their help, encouragement,
and insights.
Acknowledgments from the First Edition
We are deeply indebted to many friends and colleagues for their thoughtful crit-
icisms and encouragement. A special thanks to our 15-213 students, whose infec-
tious energy and enthusiasm spurred us on. Nick Carter and Vinny Furia gener-
ously provided their malloc package.
Guy Blelloch, Greg Kesden, Bruce Maggs, and Todd Mowry taught the course
over multiple semesters, gave us encouragement, and helped improve the course
material. Herb Derby provided early spiritual guidance and encouragement. Al-
lan Fisher, Garth Gibson, Thomas Gross, Satya, Peter Steenkiste, and Hui Zhang
encouraged us to develop the course from the start. A suggestion from Garth
early on got the whole ball rolling, and this was picked up and reﬁned with the
help of a group led by Allan Fisher. Mark Stehlik and Peter Lee have been very
supportive about building this material into the undergraduate curriculum. Greg
Kesden provided helpful feedback on the impact of ICS on the OS course. Greg
Ganger and Jiri Schindler graciously provided some disk drive characterizations
