684
Chapter 6
The Memory Hierarchy
6.7
Summary
The basic storage technologies are random access memories (RAMs), nonvolatile
memories (ROMs), and disks. RAM comes in two basic forms. Static RAM
(SRAM) is faster and more expensive and is used for cache memories. Dynamic
RAM (DRAM) is slower and less expensive and is used for the main memory and
graphics frame buffers. ROMs retain their information even if the supply voltage
is turned off. They are used to store ﬁrmware. Rotating disks are mechanical non-
volatile storage devices that hold enormous amounts of data at a low cost per bit,
but with much longer access times than DRAM. Solid state disks (SSDs) based
on nonvolatile ﬂash memory are becoming increasingly attractive alternatives to
rotating disks for some applications.
In general, faster storage technologies are more expensive per bit and have
smaller capacities. The price and performance properties of these technologies
are changing at dramatically different rates. In particular, DRAM and disk access
times are much larger than CPU cycle times. Systems bridge these gaps by orga-
nizing memory as a hierarchy of storage devices, with smaller, faster devices at
the top and larger, slower devices at the bottom. Because well-written programs
have good locality, most data are served from the higher levels, and the effect is
a memory system that runs at the rate of the higher levels, but at the cost and
capacity of the lower levels.
Programmers can dramatically improve the running times of their programs
by writing programs with good spatial and temporal locality. Exploiting SRAM-
based cache memories is especially important. Programs that fetch data primarily
from cache memories can run much faster than programs that fetch data primarily
from memory.
Bibliographic Notes
Memory and disk technologies change rapidly. In our experience, the best sources
of technical information are the Web pages maintained by the manufacturers.
Companies such as Micron, Toshiba, and Samsung provide a wealth of current
technical information on memory devices. The pages for Seagate and Western
Digital provide similarly useful information about disks.
Textbooks on circuit and logic design provide detailed information about
memory technology [58, 89]. IEEE Spectrum published a series of survey arti-
cles on DRAM [55]. The International Symposiums on Computer Architecture
(ISCA) and High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) are common fo-
rums for characterizations of DRAM memory performance [28, 29, 18].
Wilkes wrote the ﬁrst paper on cache memories [117]. Smith wrote a clas-
sic survey [104]. Przybylski wrote an authoritative book on cache design [86].
Hennessy and Patterson provide a comprehensive discussion of cache design is-
sues [46]. Levinthal wrote a comprehensive performance guide for the Intel Core
i7 [70].
Stricker introduced the idea of the memory mountain as a comprehensive
characterization of the memory system in [112] and suggested the term “memory
mountain” informally in later presentations of the work. Compiler researchers
