966
Chapter 11
Network Programming
Aside
How many Internet hosts are there?
Twice a year since 1987, the Internet Systems Consortium conducts the Internet Domain Survey. The
survey, which estimates the number of Internet hosts by counting the number of IP addresses that
have been assigned a domain name, reveals an amazing trend. Since 1987, when there were about
20,000 Internet hosts, the number of hosts has been increasing exponentially. By 2015, there were over
1,000,000,000 Internet hosts!
at the same time. And it is reliable in the sense that—barring some catastrophic
failure such as a cable cut by the proverbial careless backhoe operator—the stream
of bytes sent by the source process is eventually received by the destination process
in the same order it was sent.
A socket is an end point of a connection. Each socket has a corresponding
socket address that consists of an Internet address and a 16-bit integer port2 and
is denoted by the notation address:port.
The port in the client’s socket address is assigned automatically by the kernel
when the client makes a connection request and is known as an ephemeral port.
However, the port in the server’s socket address is typically some well-known
port that is permanently associated with the service. For example, Web servers
typically use port 80, and email servers use port 25. Associated with each service
with a well-known port is a corresponding well-known service name. For example,
the well-known name for the Web service is http, and the well-known name for
email is smtp. The mapping between well-known names and well-known ports is
contained in a ﬁle called /etc/services.
A connection is uniquely identiﬁed by the socket addresses of its two end
points. This pair of socket addresses is known as a socket pair and is denoted by
the tuple
(cliaddr:cliport, servaddr:servport)
where cliaddr is the client’s IP address, cliport is the client’s port, servaddr is the
server’s IP address, and servport is the server’s port. For example, Figure 11.11
shows a connection between a Web client and a Web server.
In this example, the Web client’s socket address is
128.2.194.242:51213
where port 51213 is an ephemeral port assigned by the kernel. The Web server’s
socket address is
208.216.181.15:80
2. These software ports have no relation to the hardware ports in network switches and routers.
