1062
Chapter 12
Concurrent Programming
ID passed in its argument to a local variable (line 22) and then prints a message
containing the ID. It looks simple enough, but when we run this program on our
system, we get the following incorrect result:
linux> ./race
Hello from thread 1
Hello from thread 3
Hello from thread 2
Hello from thread 3
The problem is caused by a race between each peer thread and the main
thread. Can you spot the race? Here is what happens. When the main thread
creates a peer thread in line 13, it passes a pointer to the local stack variable
i. At this point, the race is on between the next increment of i in line 12 and
the dereferencing and assignment of the argument in line 22. If the peer thread
executes line 22 before the main thread increments i in line 12, then the myid
variable gets the correct ID. Otherwise, it will contain the ID of some other thread.
The scary thing is that whether we get the correct answer depends on how the
kernel schedules the execution of the threads. On our system it fails, but on other
systems it might work correctly, leaving the programmer blissfully unaware of a
serious bug.
To eliminate the race, we can dynamically allocate a separate block for each
integer ID and pass the thread routine a pointer to this block, as shown in Fig-
ure 12.43 (lines 12–14). Notice that the thread routine must free the block in order
to avoid a memory leak.
When we run this program on our system, we now get the correct result:
linux> ./norace
Hello from thread 0
Hello from thread 1
Hello from thread 2
Hello from thread 3
Practice Problem 12.13 (solution page 1075)
In Figure 12.43, we might be tempted to free the allocated memory block immedi-
ately after line 14 in the main thread, instead of freeing it in the peer thread. But
this would be a bad idea. Why?
Practice Problem 12.14 (solution page 1075)
A. In Figure 12.43, we eliminated the race by allocating a separate block for
each integer ID. Outline a different approach that does not call the malloc
or free functions.
B. What are the advantages and disadvantages of this approach?
