58
Chapter 1
A Tour of Computer Systems
1.9
Important Themes
This concludes our initial whirlwind tour of systems. An important idea to take
away from this discussion is that a system is more than just hardware. It is a
collection of intertwined hardware and systems software that must cooperate in
order to achieve the ultimate goal of running application programs. The rest of
this book will ﬁll in some details about the hardware and the software, and it will
show how, by knowing these details, you can write programs that are faster, more
reliable, and more secure.
To close out this chapter, we highlight several important concepts that cut
across all aspects of computer systems. We will discuss the importance of these
concepts at multiple places within the book.
1.9.1
Amdahl’s Law
Gene Amdahl, one of the early pioneers in computing, made a simple but insight-
ful observation about the effectiveness of improving the performance of one part
of a system. This observation has come to be known as Amdahl’s law. The main
idea is that when we speed up one part of a system, the effect on the overall sys-
tem performance depends on both how signiﬁcant this part was and how much
it sped up. Consider a system in which executing some application requires time
Told. Suppose some part of the system requires a fraction α of this time, and that
we improve its performance by a factor of k. That is, the component originally re-
quired time αTold, and it now requires time (αTold)/k. The overall execution time
would thus be
Tnew = (1 −α)Told + (αTold)/k
= Told[(1 −α) + α/k]
From this, we can compute the speedup S = Told/Tnew as
S =
1
(1 −α) + α/k
(1.1)
As an example, consider the case where a part of the system that initially
consumed 60% of the time (α = 0.6) is sped up by a factor of 3 (k = 3). Then
we get a speedup of 1/[0.4 + 0.6/3] = 1.67×. Even though we made a substantial
improvement to a major part of the system, our net speedup was signiﬁcantly less
than the speedup for the one part. This is the major insight of Amdahl’s law—
to signiﬁcantly speed up the entire system, we must improve the speed of a very
large fraction of the overall system.
Practice Problem 1.1 (solution page 64)
Suppose you work as a truck driver, and you have been hired to carry a load of
potatoes from Boise, Idaho, to Minneapolis, Minnesota, a total distance of 2,500
kilometers. You estimate you can average 100 km/hr driving within the speed
limits, requiring a total of 25 hours for the trip.
