Section 2.4
Floating Point
145
Aside
The IEEE
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE—pronounced “eye-triple-ee”) is a pro-
fessional society that encompasses all of electronic and computer technology. It publishes journals,
sponsors conferences, and sets up committees to deﬁne standards on topics ranging from power trans-
mission to software engineering. Another example of an IEEE standard is the 802.11 standard for
wireless networking.
numbers very close to 0 (|V | ≪1), and more generally as an approximation to real
arithmetic.
Up until the 1980s, every computer manufacturer devised its own conventions
for how ﬂoating-point numbers were represented and the details of the operations
performed on them. In addition, they often did not worry too much about the
accuracy of the operations, viewing speed and ease of implementation as being
more critical than numerical precision.
All of this changed around 1985 with the advent of IEEE Standard 754, a
carefully crafted standard for representing ﬂoating-point numbers and the oper-
ations performed on them. This effort started in 1976 under Intel’s sponsorship
with the design of the 8087, a chip that provided ﬂoating-point support for the 8086
processor. Intel hired William Kahan, a professor at the University of California,
Berkeley, as a consultant to help design a ﬂoating-point standard for its future
processors. They allowed Kahan to join forces with a committee generating an
industry-wide standard under the auspices of the Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineers (IEEE). The committee ultimately adopted a standard close to
the one Kahan had devised for Intel. Nowadays, virtually all computers support
what has become known as IEEE ﬂoating point. This has greatly improved the
portability of scientiﬁc application programs across different machines.
In this section, we will see how numbers are represented in the IEEE ﬂoating-
point format. We will also explore issues of rounding, when a number cannot be
represented exactly in the format and hence must be adjusted upward or down-
ward. We will then explore the mathematical properties of addition, multiplica-
tion, and relational operators. Many programmers consider ﬂoating point to be
at best uninteresting and at worst arcane and incomprehensible. We will see that
since the IEEE format is based on a small and consistent set of principles, it is
really quite elegant and understandable.
2.4.1
Fractional Binary Numbers
A ﬁrst step in understanding ﬂoating-point numbers is to consider binary numbers
having fractional values. Let us ﬁrst examine the more familiar decimal notation.
Decimal notation uses a representation of the form
dm dm−1 . . . d1 d0 . d−1 d−2 . . . d−n
