632
Chapter 6
The Memory Hierarchy
Aside
Formatted disk capacity
Before a disk can be used to store data, it must be formatted by the disk controller. This involves ﬁlling
in the gaps between sectors with information that identiﬁes the sectors, identifying any cylinders with
surface defects and taking them out of action, and setting aside a set of cylinders in each zone as spares
that can be called into action if one or more cylinders in the zone goes bad during the lifetime of the
disk. The formatted capacity quoted by disk manufacturers is less than the maximum capacity because
of the existence of these spare cylinders.
Parameter
Value
Rotational rate
13,000 RPM
Tavg seek
6 ms
Average number of sectors/track
5,000
Surfaces
4
Sector size
512 bytes
For each case below, suppose that a program reads the logical blocks of the
ﬁle sequentially, one after the other, and that the time to position the head over
the ﬁrst block is Tavg seek + Tavg rotation.
A. Best case: Estimate the optimal time (in ms) required to read the ﬁle given
the best possible mapping of logical blocks to disk sectors (i.e., sequential).
B. Random case: Estimate the time (in ms) required to read the ﬁle if blocks
are mapped randomly to disk sectors.
Connecting I/O Devices
Input/output (I/O) devices such as graphics cards, monitors, mice, keyboards, and
disks are connected to the CPU and main memory using an I/O bus. Unlike the
system bus and memory buses, which are CPU-speciﬁc, I/O buses are designed
to be independent of the underlying CPU. Figure 6.11 shows a representative I/O
bus structure that connects the CPU, main memory, and I/O devices.
Although the I/O bus is slower than the system and memory buses, it can
accommodate a wide variety of third-party I/O devices. For example, the bus in
Figure 6.11 has three different types of devices attached to it.
. A Universal Serial Bus (USB) controller is a conduit for devices attached to
a USB bus, which is a wildly popular standard for connecting a variety of
peripheral I/O devices, including keyboards, mice, modems, digital cameras,
game controllers, printers, external disk drives, and solid state disks. USB
3.0 buses have a maximum bandwidth of 625 MB/s. USB 3.1 buses have a
maximum bandwidth of 1,250 MB/s.
