960
Chapter 11
Network Programming
Figure 11.8
Hardware and software
organization of an
Internet application.
Client
Internet client host
User code
Sockets interface
(system calls)
Hardware interface
(interrupts)
TCP/IP
Kernel code
Network
adapter
Server
Internet server host
TCP/IP
Network
adapter
Hardware
Global IP Internet
11.3
The Global IP Internet
The global IP Internet is the most famous and successful implementation of an
internet. It has existed in one form or another since 1969. While the internal
architecture of the Internet is complex and constantly changing, the organization
of client-server applications has remained remarkably stable since the early 1980s.
Figure 11.8 shows the basic hardware and software organization of an Internet
client-server application.
Each Internet host runs software that implements the TCP/IP protocol
(Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol), which is supported by almost
every modern computer system. Internet clients and servers communicate using
a mix of sockets interface functions and Unix I/O functions. (We will describe the
sockets interface in Section 11.4.) The sockets functions are typically implemented
as system calls that trap into the kernel and call various kernel-mode functions in
TCP/IP.
TCP/IP is actually a family of protocols, each of which contributes different
capabilities. For example, IP provides the basic naming scheme and a delivery
mechanism that can send packets, known as datagrams, from one Internet host to
any other host. The IP mechanism is unreliable in the sense that it makes no effort
to recover if datagrams are lost or duplicated in the network. UDP (Unreliable
Datagram Protocol) extends IP slightly, so that datagrams can be transferred
from process to process, rather than host to host. TCP is a complex protocol that
builds on IP to provide reliable full duplex (bidirectional) connections between
processes. To simplify our discussion, we will treat TCP/IP as a single monolithic
protocol. We will not discuss its inner workings, and we will only discuss some of
the basic capabilities that TCP and IP provide to application programs. We will
not discuss UDP.
From a programmer’s perspective, we can think of the Internet as a worldwide
collection of hosts with the following properties:
. The set of hosts is mapped to a set of 32-bit IP addresses.
