Section 6.1
Storage Technologies
629
Spindle
The disk surface
spins at a fixed
rotational rate.
The read/write head
is attached to the end
of the arm and flies over
the disk surface on
a thin cushion of air.
By moving radially, the arm
can position the read/write
head over any track.
(a) Single-platter view
Read/write heads
Arm
Spindle
(b) Multiple-platter view
Figure 6.10
Disk dynamics.
the arm back and forth along its radial axis, the drive can position the head over
any track on the surface. This mechanical motion is known as a seek. Once the
head is positioned over the desired track, then, as each bit on the track passes
underneath, the head can either sense the value of the bit (read the bit) or alter
the value of the bit (write the bit). Disks with multiple platters have a separate
read/write head for each surface, as shown in Figure 6.10(b). The heads are lined
up vertically and move in unison. At any point in time, all heads are positioned
on the same cylinder.
The read/write head at the end of the arm ﬂies (literally) on a thin cushion of
air over the disk surface at a height of about 0.1 microns and a speed of about 80
km/h. This is analogous to placing a skyscraper on its side and ﬂying it around the
world at a height of 2.5 cm (1 inch) above the ground, with each orbit of the earth
taking only 8 seconds! At these tolerances, a tiny piece of dust on the surface is like
a huge boulder. If the head were to strike one of these boulders, the head would
cease ﬂying and crash into the surface (a so-called head crash). For this reason,
disks are always sealed in airtight packages.
Disks read and write data in sector-size blocks. The access time for a sector
has three main components: seek time, rotational latency, and transfer time:
Seek time. To read the contents of some target sector, the arm ﬁrst positions the
head over the track that contains the target sector. The time required to
move the arm is called the seek time. The seek time, Tseek, depends on the
previous position of the head and the speed that the arm moves across the
surface. The average seek time in modern drives, Tavg seek, measured by
taking the mean of several thousand seeks to random sectors, is typically
on the order of 3 to 9 ms. The maximum time for a single seek, Tmax seek,
can be as high as 20 ms.
