Section 4.2
Logic Design and the Hardware Control Language HCL
411
Figure 4.11
Single-bit multiplexor
circuit. The output will
equal input a if the control
signal s is 1 and will equal
input b when s is 0.
s
b
a
Bit MUX
out
selects a value from among a set of different data signals, depending on the value
of a control input signal. In this single-bit multiplexor, the two data signals are the
input bits a and b, while the control signal is the input bit s. The output will equal
a when s is 1, and it will equal b when s is 0. In this circuit, we can see that the two
and gates determine whether to pass their respective data inputs to the or gate.
The upper and gate passes signal b when s is 0 (since the other input to the gate
is !s), while the lower and gate passes signal a when s is 1. Again, we can write an
HCL expression for the output signal, using the same operations as are present in
the combinational circuit:
bool out = (s && a) || (!s && b);
Our HCL expressions demonstrate a clear parallel between combinational
logic circuits and logical expressions in C. They both use Boolean operations to
compute functions over their inputs. Several differences between these two ways
of expressing computation are worth noting:
. Since a combinational circuit consists of a series of logic gates, it has the
property that the outputs continually respond to changes in the inputs. If
some input to the circuit changes, then after some delay, the outputs will
change accordingly. By contrast, a C expression is only evaluated when it is
encountered during the execution of a program.
. Logical expressions in C allow arguments to be arbitrary integers, interpreting
0 as false and anything else as true. In contrast, our logic gates only operate
over the bit values 0 and 1.
. Logical expressions in C have the property that they might only be partially
evaluated. If the outcome of an and or or operation can be determined by just
evaluating the ﬁrst argument, then the second argument will not be evaluated.
For example, with the C expression
(a && !a) && func(b,c)
the function func will not be called, because the expression (a && !a) evalu-
ates to 0. In contrast, combinational logic does not have any partial evaluation
rules. The gates simply respond to changing inputs.
