618
Chapter 6
The Memory Hierarchy
Transistors
Relative
Relative
per bit
access time
Persistent?
Sensitive?
cost
Applications
SRAM
6
1×
Yes
No
1,000×
Cache memory
DRAM
1
10×
No
Yes
1×
Main memory, frame buffers
Figure 6.2
Characteristics of DRAM and SRAM memory.
Dynamic RAM
DRAM stores each bit as charge on a capacitor. This capacitor is very small—
typically around 30 femtofarads—that is, 30 × 10−15 farads. Recall, however, that
a farad is a very large unit of measure. DRAM storage can be made very dense—
each cell consists of a capacitor and a single access transistor. Unlike SRAM,
however, a DRAM memory cell is very sensitive to any disturbance. When the
capacitor voltage is disturbed, it will never recover. Exposure to light rays will
cause the capacitor voltages to change. In fact, the sensors in digital cameras and
camcorders are essentially arrays of DRAM cells.
Various sources of leakage current cause a DRAM cell to lose its charge
within a time period of around 10 to 100 milliseconds. Fortunately, for computers
operating with clock cycle times measured in nanoseconds, this retention time is
quite long. The memory system must periodically refresh every bit of memory by
reading it out and then rewriting it. Some systems also use error-correcting codes,
where the computer words are encoded using a few more bits (e.g., a 64-bit word
might be encoded using 72 bits), such that circuitry can detect and correct any
single erroneous bit within a word.
Figure 6.2 summarizes the characteristics of SRAM and DRAM memory.
SRAM is persistent as long as power is applied. Unlike DRAM, no refresh is
necessary. SRAM can be accessed faster than DRAM. SRAM is not sensitive to
disturbances such as light and electrical noise. The trade-off is that SRAM cells
use more transistors than DRAM cells and thus have lower densities, are more
expensive, and consume more power.
Conventional DRAMs
The cells (bits) in a DRAM chip are partitioned into d supercells, each consisting
of w DRAM cells. A d × w DRAM stores a total of dw bits of information. The
supercells are organized as a rectangular array with r rows and c columns, where
rc = d. Each supercell has an address of the form (i, j), where i denotes the row
and j denotes the column.
For example, Figure 6.3 shows the organization of a 16 × 8 DRAM chip with
d = 16 supercells, w = 8 bits per supercell, r = 4 rows, and c = 4 columns. The
shaded box denotes the supercell at address (2, 1). Information ﬂows in and out
of the chip via external connectors called pins. Each pin carries a 1-bit signal.
Figure 6.3 shows two of these sets of pins: eight data pins that can transfer 1 byte
