Section 9.9
Dynamic Memory Allocation
887
Unused
Start
of
heap
8/0
16/1
16/0
16/1
16/0
0/1
Double-
word
aligned
Figure 9.38
An example of false fragmentation. Allocated blocks are shaded. Free blocks are unshaded.
Headers are labeled with (size (bytes)/allocated bit).
Immediate coalescing is straightforward and can be performed in constant
time, but with some request patterns it can introduce a form of thrashing where a
block is repeatedly coalesced and then split soon thereafter. For example, in Fig-
ure 9.38, a repeated pattern of allocating and freeing a three-word block would
introduce a lot of unnecessary splitting and coalescing. In our discussion of allo-
cators, we will assume immediate coalescing, but you should be aware that fast
allocators often opt for some form of deferred coalescing.
9.9.11
Coalescing with Boundary Tags
How does an allocator implement coalescing? Let us refer to the block we want
to free as the current block. Then coalescing the next free block (in memory) is
straightforward and efﬁcient. The header of the current block points to the header
of the next block, which can be checked to determine if the next block is free. If
so, its size is simply added to the size of the current header and the blocks are
coalesced in constant time.
But how would we coalesce the previous block? Given an implicit free list of
blocks with headers, the only option would be to search the entire list, remember-
ing the location of the previous block, until we reached the current block. With an
implicit free list, this means that each call to free would require time linear in the
size of the heap. Even with more sophisticated free list organizations, the search
time would not be constant.
Knuth developed a clever and general technique, known as boundary tags,
that allows for constant-time coalescing of the previous block. The idea, which is
shown in Figure 9.39, is to add a footer (the boundary tag) at the end of each block,
where the footer is a replica of the header. If each block includes such a footer,
then the allocator can determine the starting location and status of the previous
block by inspecting its footer, which is always one word away from the start of the
current block.
Consider all the cases that can exist when the allocator frees the current block:
1. The previous and next blocks are both allocated.
2. The previous block is allocated and the next block is free.
3. The previous block is free and the next block is allocated.
4. The previous and next blocks are both free.
