638
Chapter 6
The Memory Hierarchy
128 petabytes (128 × 1015 bytes) of writes before the drive wears out. Given
this assumption, estimate the lifetime (in years) of this SSD for the following
workloads:
A. Worst case for sequential writes: The SSD is written to continuously at a rate
of 470 MB/s (the average sequential write throughput of the device).
B. Worst case for random writes: The SSD is written to continuously at a rate
of 303 MB/s (the average random write throughput of the device).
C. Average case: The SSD is written to at a rate of 20 GB/day (the average
daily write rate assumed by some computer manufacturers in their mobile
computer workload simulations).
6.1.4
Storage Technology Trends
There are several important concepts to take away from our discussion of storage
technologies.
Different storage technologies have different price and performance trade-offs.
SRAM is somewhat faster than DRAM, and DRAM is much faster than disk. On
the other hand, fast storage is always more expensive than slower storage. SRAM
costs more per byte than DRAM. DRAM costs much more than disk. SSDs split
the difference between DRAM and rotating disk.
The price and performance properties of different storage technologies are
changing at dramatically different rates.Figure 6.15 summarizes the price and per-
formance properties of storage technologies since 1985, shortly after the ﬁrst PCs
were introduced. The numbers were culled from back issues of trade magazines
and the Web. Although they were collected in an informal survey, the numbers
reveal some interesting trends.
Since 1985, both the cost and performance of SRAM technology have im-
proved at roughly the same rate. Access times and cost per megabyte have de-
creased by a factor of about 100 (Figure 6.15(a)). However, the trends for DRAM
and disk are much more dramatic and divergent. While the cost per megabyte of
DRAM has decreased by a factor of 44,000 (more than four orders of magnitude!),
DRAM access times have decreased by only a factor of 10 (Figure 6.15(b)). Disk
technology has followed the same trend as DRAM and in even more dramatic
fashion. While the cost of a megabyte of disk storage has plummeted by a factor
of more than 3,000,000 (more than six orders of magnitude!) since 1980, access
times have improved much more slowly, by only a factor of 25 (Figure 6.15(c)).
These startling long-term trends highlight a basic truth of memory and disk tech-
nology: it is much easier to increase density (and thereby reduce cost) than to
decrease access time.
DRAM and disk performance are lagging behind CPU performance.As we see
in Figure 6.15(d), CPU cycle times improved by a factor of 500 between 1985 and
2010. If we look at the effective cycle time —which we deﬁne to be the cycle time
of an individual CPU (processor) divided by the number of its processor cores—
then the improvement between 1985 and 2010 is even greater, a factor of 2,000.
