Chapter 4
Processor Architecture
389
Aside
The progress of computer technology
To get a sense of how much computer technology has improved over the past four decades, consider
the following two processors.
The ﬁrst Cray 1 supercomputer was delivered to Los Alamos National Laboratory in 1976. It was
the fastest computer in the world, able to perform as many as 250 million arithmetic operations per
second. It came with 8 megabytes of random access memory, the maximum conﬁguration allowed by
the hardware. The machine was also very large—it weighed 5,000 kg, consumed 115 kilowatts, and cost
$9 million. In total, around 80 of them were manufactured.
The Apple ARM A7 microprocessor chip, introduced in 2013 to power the iPhone 5S, contains
two CPUs, each of which can perform several billion arithmetic operations per second, and 1 gigabyte
of random access memory. The entire phone weighs just 112 grams, consumes around 1 watt, and costs
less than $800. Over 9 million units were sold in the ﬁrst weekend of its introduction. In addition to
being a powerful computer, it can be used to take pictures, to place phone calls, and to provide driving
directions, features never considered for the Cray 1.
These two systems, spaced just 37 years apart, demonstrate the tremendous progress of semicon-
ductor technology. Whereas the Cray 1’s CPU was constructed using around 100,000 semiconductor
chips, each containing less than 20 transistors, the Apple A7 has over 1 billion transistors on its single
chip. The Cray 1’s 8-megabyte memory required 8,192 chips, whereas the iPhone’s gigabyte memory is
contained in a single chip.
a system that is such a part of the daily lives of computer scientists and engi-
neers and yet remains a mystery to many. Processor design embodies many of
the principles of good engineering practice. It requires creating a simple and
regular structure to perform a complex task.
. Understanding how the processor works aids in understanding how the overall
computer system works.In Chapter 6, we will look at the memory system and
the techniques used to create an image of a very large memory with a very
fast access time. Seeing the processor side of the processor–memory interface
will make this presentation more complete.
. Although few people design processors, many design hardware systems that
contain processors. This has become commonplace as processors are embed-
ded into real-world systems such as automobiles and appliances. Embedded-
system designers must understand how processors work, because these sys-
tems are generally designed and programmed at a lower level of abstraction
than is the case for desktop and server-based systems.
. You just might work on a processor design. Although the number of compa-
nies producing microprocessors is small, the design teams working on those
processors are already large and growing. There can be over 1,000 people
involved in the different aspects of a major processor design.
In this chapter, we start by deﬁning a simple instruction set that we use as a
running example for our processor implementations. We call this the “Y86-64”
