Section 6.1
Storage Technologies
617
6.1
Storage Technologies
Much of the success of computer technology stems from the tremendous progress
in storage technology. Early computers had a few kilobytes of random access
memory. The earliest IBM PCs didn’t even have a hard disk. That changed with
the introduction of the IBM PC-XT in 1982, with its 10-megabyte disk. By the year
2015, typical machines had 300,000 times as much disk storage, and the amount of
storage was increasing by a factor of 2 every couple of years.
6.1.1
Random Access Memory
Random access memory (RAM)comes in two varieties—static and dynamic. Static
RAM (SRAM) is faster and signiﬁcantly more expensive than dynamic RAM
(DRAM). SRAM is used for cache memories, both on and off the CPU chip.
DRAM is used for the main memory plus the frame buffer of a graphics system.
Typically, a desktop system will have no more than a few tens of megabytes of
SRAM, but hundreds or thousands of megabytes of DRAM.
Static RAM
SRAM stores each bit in a bistable memory cell. Each cell is implemented with
a six-transistor circuit. This circuit has the property that it can stay indeﬁnitely
in either of two different voltage conﬁgurations, or states. Any other state will
be unstable—starting from there, the circuit will quickly move toward one of the
stable states. Such a memory cell is analogous to the inverted pendulum illustrated
in Figure 6.1.
The pendulum is stable when it is tilted either all the way to the left or all the
way to the right. From any other position, the pendulum will fall to one side or the
other. In principle, the pendulum could also remain balanced in a vertical position
indeﬁnitely, but this state is metastable—the smallest disturbance would make it
start to fall, and once it fell it would never return to the vertical position.
Due to its bistable nature, an SRAM memory cell will retain its value indef-
initely, as long as it is kept powered. Even when a disturbance, such as electrical
noise, perturbs the voltages, the circuit will return to the stable value when the
disturbance is removed.
Figure 6.1
Inverted pendulum.
Like an SRAM cell, the
pendulum has only two
stable conﬁgurations, or
states.
Stable left
Stable right
Unstable
