Section 6.1
Storage Technologies
631
This example illustrates some important points:
. The time to access the 512 bytes in a disk sector is dominated by the seek time
and the rotational latency. Accessing the ﬁrst byte in the sector takes a long
time, but the remaining bytes are essentially free.
. Since the seek time and rotational latency are roughly the same, twice the
seek time is a simple and reasonable rule for estimating disk access time.
. The access time for a 64-bit word stored in SRAM is roughly 4 ns, and 60 ns
for DRAM. Thus, the time to read a 512-byte sector-size block from memory
is roughly 256 ns for SRAM and 4,000 ns for DRAM. The disk access time,
roughly 10 ms, is about 40,000 times greater than SRAM, and about 2,500
times greater than DRAM.
Practice Problem 6.3 (solution page 697)
Estimate the average time (in ms) to access a sector on the following disk:
Parameter
Value
Rotational rate
12,000 RPM
Tavg seek
5 ms
Average number of sectors/track
300
Logical Disk Blocks
As we have seen, modern disks have complex geometries, with multiple surfaces
and different recording zones on those surfaces. To hide this complexity from
the operating system, modern disks present a simpler view of their geometry as
a sequence of B sector-size logical blocks, numbered 0, 1, . . . , B −1. A small
hardware/ﬁrmware device in the disk package, called the disk controller, maintains
the mapping between logical block numbers and actual (physical) disk sectors.
When the operating system wants to perform an I/O operation such as reading
a disk sector into main memory, it sends a command to the disk controller asking
it to read a particular logical block number. Firmware on the controller performs
a fast table lookup that translates the logical block number into a (surface, track,
sector)triple that uniquely identiﬁes the corresponding physical sector. Hardware
on the controller interprets this triple to move the heads to the appropriate
cylinder, waits for the sector to pass under the head, gathers up the bits sensed
by the head into a small memory buffer on the controller, and copies them into
main memory.
Practice Problem 6.4 (solution page 697)
Suppose that a 1 MB ﬁle consisting of 512-byte logical blocks is stored on a disk
drive with the following characteristics:
