988
Chapter 11
Network Programming
(uniform resource identiﬁer). The URI is the sufﬁx of the corresponding URL
that includes the ﬁlename and optional arguments.3
The version ﬁeld in the request line indicates the HTTP version to which the
request conforms. The most recent HTTP version is HTTP/1.1 [37]. HTTP/1.0 is an
earlier, much simpler version from 1996 [6]. HTTP/1.1 deﬁnes additional headers
that provide support for advanced features such as caching and security, as well
as a mechanism that allows a client and server to perform multiple transactions
over the same persistent connection. In practice, the two versions are compatible
because HTTP/1.0 clients and servers simply ignore unknown HTTP/1.1 headers.
To summarize, the request line in line 5 asks the server to fetch and return
the HTML ﬁle /index.html. It also informs the server that the remainder of the
request will be in HTTP/1.1 format.
Request headers provide additional information to the server, such as the
brand name of the browser or the MIME types that the browser understands.
Request headers have the form
header-name: header-data
For our purposes, the only header to be concerned with is the Host header (line 6),
which is required in HTTP/1.1 requests, but not in HTTP/1.0 requests. The Host
header is used by proxy caches, which sometimes serve as intermediaries between
a browser and the origin server that manages the requested ﬁle. Multiple proxies
can exist between a client and an origin server in a so-called proxy chain. The data
in the Host header, which identiﬁes the domain name of the origin server, allow a
proxy in the middle of a proxy chain to determine if it might have a locally cached
copy of the requested content.
Continuing with our example in Figure 11.24, the empty text line in line 7
(generated by hitting enter on our keyboard) terminates the headers and instructs
the server to send the requested HTML ﬁle.
HTTP Responses
HTTP responses are similar to HTTP requests. An HTTP response consists of
a response line (line 8), followed by zero or more response headers (lines 9–13),
followed by an empty line that terminates the headers (line 14), followed by the
response body (lines 15–17). A response line has the form
version status-code status-message
The version ﬁeld describes the HTTP version that the response conforms to.
The status-code is a three-digit positive integer that indicates the disposition of
the request. The status-message gives the English equivalent of the error code.
Figure 11.25 lists some common status codes and their corresponding messages.
3. Actually, this is only true when a browser requests content. If a proxy server requests content, then
the URI must be the complete URL.
