40
Chapter 1
A Tour of Computer Systems
Aside
Origins of the C programming language
C was developed from 1969 to 1973 by Dennis Ritchie of Bell Laboratories. The American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) ratiﬁed the ANSI C standard in 1989, and this standardization later became
the responsibility of the International Standards Organization (ISO). The standards deﬁne the C
language and a set of library functions known as the C standard library. Kernighan and Ritchie describe
ANSI C in their classic book, which is known affectionately as “K&R” [61]. In Ritchie’s words [92], C
is “quirky, ﬂawed, and an enormous success.” So why the success?
. C was closely tied with the Unix operating system. C was developed from the beginning as the
system programming language for Unix. Most of the Unix kernel (the core part of the operating
system), and all of its supporting tools and libraries, were written in C. As Unix became popular in
universities in the late 1970s and early 1980s, many people were exposed to C and found that they
liked it. Since Unix was written almost entirely in C, it could be easily ported to new machines,
which created an even wider audience for both C and Unix.
. C is a small, simple language.The design was controlled by a single person, rather than a committee,
and the result was a clean, consistent design with little baggage. The K&R book describes the
complete language and standard library, with numerous examples and exercises, in only 261 pages.
The simplicity of C made it relatively easy to learn and to port to different computers.
. C was designed for a practical purpose. C was designed to implement the Unix operating system.
Later, other people found that they could write the programs they wanted, without the language
getting in the way.
C is the language of choice for system-level programming, and there is a huge installed base of
application-level programs as well. However, it is not perfect for all programmers and all situations.
C pointers are a common source of confusion and programming errors. C also lacks explicit support
for useful abstractions such as classes, objects, and exceptions. Newer languages such as C++ and Java
address these issues for application-level programs.
approximations that can behave in unexpected ways. This fundamental idea is
explored in detail in Chapter 2.
1.2
Programs Are Translated by Other Programs
into Different Forms
The hello program begins life as a high-level C program because it can be read
and understood by human beings in that form. However, in order to run hello.c
on the system, the individual C statements must be translated by other programs
into a sequence of low-level machine-language instructions. These instructions are
then packaged in a form called an executable object program and stored as a binary
disk ﬁle. Object programs are also referred to as executable object ﬁles.
On a Unix system, the translation from source ﬁle to object ﬁle is performed
by a compiler driver:
