26
Preface
New to This Edition
The ﬁrst edition of this book was published with a copyright of 2003, while the
second had a copyright of 2011. Considering the rapid evolution of computer
technology, the book content has held up surprisingly well. Intel x86 machines
running C programs under Linux (and related operating systems) has proved to
be a combination that continues to encompass many systems today. However,
changes in hardware technology, compilers, program library interfaces, and the
experience of many instructors teaching the material have prompted a substantial
revision.
The biggest overall change from the second edition is that we have switched
our presentation from one based on a mix of IA32 and x86-64 to one based
exclusively on x86-64. This shift in focus affected the contents of many of the
chapters. Here is a summary of the signiﬁcant changes.
Chapter 1: A Tour of Computer Systems We have moved the discussion of Am-
dahl’s Law from Chapter 5 into this chapter.
Chapter 2: Representing and Manipulating Information. A consistent bit of feed-
back from readers and reviewers is that some of the material in this chapter
can be a bit overwhelming. So we have tried to make the material more ac-
cessible by clarifying the points at which we delve into a more mathematical
style of presentation. This enables readers to ﬁrst skim over mathematical
details to get a high-level overview and then return for a more thorough
reading.
Chapter 3: Machine-Level Representation of Programs. We have converted from
the earlier presentation based on a mix of IA32 and x86-64 to one based
entirely on x86-64. We have also updated for the style of code generated by
more recent versions of gcc. The result is a substantial rewriting, including
changing the order in which some of the concepts are presented. We also
have included, for the ﬁrst time, a presentation of the machine-level support
for programs operating on ﬂoating-point data. We have created a Web aside
describing IA32 machine code for legacy reasons.
Chapter 4: Processor Architecture. We have revised the earlier processor design,
based on a 32-bit architecture, to one that supports 64-bit words and oper-
ations.
Chapter 5: Optimizing Program Performance. We have updated the material to
reﬂect the performance capabilities of recent generations of x86-64 proces-
sors. With the introduction of more functional units and more sophisticated
control logic, the model of program performance we developed based on a
data-ﬂow representation of programs has become a more reliable predictor
of performance than it was before.
Chapter 6: The Memory Hierarchy. We have updated the material to reﬂect more
recent technology.
