410
Chapter 4
Processor Architecture
Figure 4.10
Combinational circuit to
test for bit equality. The
output will equal 1 when
both inputs are 0 or both
are 1.
a
b
eq
Bit equal
4.2.2
Combinational Circuits and HCL Boolean Expressions
By assembling a number of logic gates into a network, we can construct computa-
tional blocks known as combinational circuits. Several restrictions are placed on
how the networks are constructed:
. Every logic gate input must be connected to exactly one of the following:
(1) one of the system inputs (known as a primary input), (2) the output
connection of some memory element, or (3) the output of some logic gate.
. The outputs of two or more logic gates cannot be connected together. Oth-
erwise, the two could try to drive the wire toward different voltages, possibly
causing an invalid voltage or a circuit malfunction.
. The network must be acyclic. That is, there cannot be a path through a series
of gates that forms a loop in the network. Such loops can cause ambiguity in
the function computed by the network.
Figure 4.10 shows an example of a simple combinational circuit that we will
ﬁnd useful. It has two inputs, a and b. It generates a single output eq, such that
the output will equal 1 if either a and b are both 1 (detected by the upper and
gate) or are both 0 (detected by the lower and gate). We write the function of this
network in HCL as
bool eq = (a && b) || (!a && !b);
This code simply deﬁnes the bit-level (denoted by data type bool) signal eq as a
function of inputs a and b. As this example shows, HCL uses C-style syntax, with
‘=’ associating a signal name with an expression. Unlike C, however, we do not
view this as performing a computation and assigning the result to some memory
location. Instead, it is simply a way to give a name to an expression.
Practice Problem 4.9 (solution page 520)
Write an HCL expression for a signal xor, equal to the exclusive-or of inputs a
and b. What is the relation between the signals xor and eq deﬁned above?
Figure 4.11 shows another example of a simple but useful combinational
circuit known as a multiplexor (commonly referred to as a “MUX”). A multiplexor
