Vice President and Editorial Director: Marcia J. Horton
Executive Editor: Matt Goldstein
Editorial Assistant: Kelsey Loanes
Acquisitions Editor, Global Editions: Karthik Subramanian
VP of Marketing: Christy Lesko
Director of Field Marketing: Tim Galligan
Product Marketing Manager: Bram van Kempen
Field Marketing Manager: Demetrius Hall
Marketing Assistant: Jon Bryant
Director of Product Management: Erin Gregg
Team Lead Product Management: Scott Disanno
Program Manager: Joanne Manning
Project Editor, Global Editions: K.K. Neelakantan
Senior Production Manufacturing Controller,
Global Editions: Trudy Kimber
Procurement Manager: Mary Fischer
Senior Specialist, Program Planning and Support:
Maura Zaldivar-Garcia
Media Production Manager, Global Editions:
Vikram Kumar
Cover Designer: Lumina Datamatics
Manager, Rights Management: Rachel Youdelman
Associate Project Manager, Rights Management:
William J. Opaluch
Full-Service Project Management: Paul Anagnostopoulos,
Windfall Software
Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England
and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at:
www.pearsonglobaleditions.com
© Pearson Education Limited 2016
The rights of Randal E. Bryant and David R. O’Hallaron to be identiﬁed as the authors of this work have been asserted by
them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Authorized adaptation from the United States edition, entitled Computer Systems: A Programmer’s Perspective, 3rd edition,
ISBN 978-0-13-409266-9, by Randal E. Bryant and David R. O’Hallaron published by Pearson Education © 2016.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the prior written permission of
the publisher or a license permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd,
Saffron House, 6-10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark in this text does not vest in
the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any
afﬁliation with or endorsement of this book by such owners.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ISBN 10: 1-292-10176-8
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-10176-7  (Print)
Typeset in 10/12 Times Ten, ITC Stone Sans by Windfall Software
Printed in Malaysia
ISBN 13: 978-1-488-67207-1  (PDF)
