Section 6.1
Storage Technologies
619
Aside
A note on terminology
The storage community has never settled on a standard name for a DRAM array element. Computer
architects tend to refer to it as a “cell,” overloading the term with the DRAM storage cell. Circuit
designers tend to refer to it as a “word,” overloading the term with a word of main memory. To avoid
confusion, we have adopted the unambiguous term “supercell.”
Figure 6.3
High-level view of a
128-bit 16 × 8 DRAM
chip.
Memory
controller
2
addr
8
data
(to CPU)
DRAM chip
Cols
0
0
1
2
3
1
2
3
Supercell
(2,1)
Internal row buffer
Rows
in or out of the chip, and two addr pins that carry two-bit row and column supercell
addresses. Other pins that carry control information are not shown.
Each DRAM chip is connected to some circuitry, known as the memory
controller, that can transfer w bits at a time to and from each DRAM chip. To read
the contents of supercell (i, j), the memory controller sends the row address i to
the DRAM, followed by the column address j. The DRAM responds by sending
the contents of supercell (i, j) back to the controller. The row address i is called
a RAS (row access strobe) request. The column address j is called a CAS (column
access strobe) request. Notice that the RAS and CAS requests share the same
DRAM address pins.
For example, to read supercell (2, 1) from the 16 × 8 DRAM in Figure 6.3, the
memory controller sends row address 2, as shown in Figure 6.4(a). The DRAM
responds by copying the entire contents of row 2 into an internal row buffer. Next,
the memory controller sends column address 1, as shown in Figure 6.4(b). The
DRAM responds by copying the 8 bits in supercell (2, 1) from the row buffer and
sending them to the memory controller.
One reason circuit designers organize DRAMs as two-dimensional arrays
instead of linear arrays is to reduce the number of address pins on the chip. For
example, if our example 128-bit DRAM were organized as a linear array of 16
supercells with addresses 0 to 15, then the chip would need four address pins
instead of two. The disadvantage of the two-dimensional array organization is
that addresses must be sent in two distinct steps, which increases the access time.
