984
Chapter 11
Network Programming
Aside
What does EOF on a connection mean?
The idea of EOF is often confusing to students, especially in the context of Internet connections. First,
we need to understand that there is no such thing as an EOF character. Rather, EOF is a condition that
is detected by the kernel. An application ﬁnds out about the EOF condition when it receives a zero
return code from the read function. For disk ﬁles, EOF occurs when the current ﬁle position exceeds
the ﬁle length. For Internet connections, EOF occurs when a process closes its end of the connection.
The process at the other end of the connection detects the EOF when it attempts to read past the last
byte in the stream.
11.5
Web Servers
So far we have discussed network programming in the context of a simple echo
server. In this section, we will show you how to use the basic ideas of network
programming to build your own small, but quite functional, Web server.
11.5.1
Web Basics
Web clients and servers interact using a text-based application-level protocol
known as HTTP (hypertext transfer protocol). HTTP is a simple protocol. A Web
client (known as a browser) opens an Internet connection to a server and requests
some content. The server responds with the requested content and then closes the
connection. The browser reads the content and displays it on the screen.
What distinguishes Web services from conventional ﬁle retrieval services such
as FTP? The main difference is that Web content can be written in a language
known as HTML (hypertext markup language). An HTML program (page) con-
tains instructions (tags) that tell the browser how to display various text and
graphical objects in the page. For example, the code
<b> Make me bold! </b>
tells the browser to print the text between the <b> and </b> tags in boldface type.
However, the real power of HTML is that a page can contain pointers (hyperlinks)
to content stored on any Internet host. For example, an HTML line of the form
<a href="http://www.cmu.edu/index.html">Carnegie Mellon</a>
tells the browser to highlight the text object Carnegie Mellon and to create a
hyperlink to an HTML ﬁle called index.html that is stored on the CMU Web
server. If the user clicks on the highlighted text object, the browser requests the
corresponding HTML ﬁle from the CMU server and displays it.
