916
Chapter 9
Virtual Memory
9.19 ◆
You are given three groups of statements relating to memory management and
garbage collection below. In each group, only one statement is true. Your task is
to indicate which statement is true.
1. (a) In a buddy system, up to 50% of the space can be wasted due to internal
fragmentation.
(b) The ﬁrst-ﬁt memory allocation algorithm is slower than the best-ﬁt algo-
rithm (on average).
(c) Deallocation using boundary tags is fast only when the list of free blocks
is ordered according to increasing memory addresses.
(d) The buddy system suffers from internal fragmentation, but not from
external fragmentation.
2. (a) Using the ﬁrst-ﬁt algorithm on a free list that is ordered according to
decreasing block sizes results in low performance for allocations, but
avoids external fragmentation.
(b) For the best-ﬁt method, the list of free blocks should be ordered according
to increasing memory addresses.
(c) The best-ﬁt method chooses the largest free block into which the re-
quested segment ﬁts.
(d) Using the ﬁrst-ﬁt algorithm on a free list that is ordered according to
increasing block sizes is equivalent to using the best-ﬁt algorithm.
3. Mark&Sweep garbage collectors are called conservative if
(a) They coalesce freed memory only when a memory request cannot be
satisﬁed.
(b) They treat everything that looks like a pointer as a pointer.
(c) They perform garbage collection only when they run out of memory.
(d) They do not free memory blocks forming a cyclic list.
9.20 ◆◆◆◆
Write your own version of malloc and free, and compare its running time and
space utilization to the version of malloc provided in the standard C library.
Solutions to Practice Problems
Solution to Problem 9.1 (page 841)
This problem gives you some appreciation for the sizes of different address spaces.
At one point in time, a 32-bit address space seemed impossibly large. But now
there are database and scientiﬁc applications that need more, and you can expect
this trend to continue. At some point in your lifetime, expect to ﬁnd yourself
complaining about the cramped 64-bit address space on your personal computer!
