Section 11.5
Web Servers
989
Aside
Passing arguments in HTTP POST requests
Arguments for HTTP POST requests are passed in the request body rather than in the URI.
Status code
Status message
Description
200
OK
Request was handled without error.
301
Moved permanently
Content has moved to the hostname in the Location header.
400
Bad request
Request could not be understood by the server.
403
Forbidden
Server lacks permission to access the requested ﬁle.
404
Not found
Server could not ﬁnd the requested ﬁle.
501
Not implemented
Server does not support the request method.
505
HTTP version not supported
Server does not support version in request.
Figure 11.25
Some HTTP status codes.
The response headers in lines 9–13 provide additional information about the
response. For our purposes, the two most important headers are Content-Type
(line 12), which tells the client the MIME type of the content in the response body,
and Content-Length (line 13), which indicates its size in bytes.
The empty text line in line 14 that terminates the response headers is followed
by the response body, which contains the requested content.
11.5.4
Serving Dynamic Content
If we stop to think for a moment how a server might provide dynamic content
to a client, certain questions arise. For example, how does the client pass any
program arguments to the server? How does the server pass these arguments
to the child process that it creates? How does the server pass other information
to the child that it might need to generate the content? Where does the child
send its output? These questions are addressed by a de facto standard called CGI
(common gateway interface).
How Does the Client Pass Program Arguments to the Server?
Arguments for GET requests are passed in the URI. As we have seen, a ‘?’ char-
acter separates the ﬁlename from the arguments, and each argument is separated
by an ‘&’ character. Spaces are not allowed in arguments and must be represented
with the %20 string. Similar encodings exist for other special characters.
How Does the Server Pass Arguments to the Child?
After a server receives a request such as
GET /cgi-bin/adder?15000&213 HTTP/1.1
