Section 12.7
Other Concurrency Issues
1059
Figure 12.39
Relationships between
the sets of reentrant,
thread-safe, and thread-
unsafe functions.
All functions
Thread-safe
functions
Thread-unsafe
functions
Reentrant
functions
code/conc/rand-r.c
1
/* rand_r - return a pseudorandom integer on 0..32767 */
2
int rand_r(unsigned int *nextp)
3
{
4
*nextp = *nextp * 1103515245 + 12345;
5
return (unsigned int)(*nextp / 65536) % 32768;
6
}
code/conc/rand-r.c
Figure 12.40 rand_r: A reentrant version of the rand function from Figure 12.37.
12.7.2
Reentrancy
There is an important class of thread-safe functions, known as reentrant functions,
that are characterized by the property that they do not reference any shared data
when they are called by multiple threads. Although the terms thread-safe and
reentrant are sometimes used (incorrectly) as synonyms, there is a clear technical
distinction that is worth preserving. Figure 12.39 shows the set relationships be-
tween reentrant, thread-safe, and thread-unsafe functions. The set of all functions
is partitioned into the disjoint sets of thread-safe and thread-unsafe functions. The
set of reentrant functions is a proper subset of the thread-safe functions.
Reentrant functions are typically more efﬁcient than non-reentrant thread-
safe functions because they require no synchronization operations. Furthermore,
the only way to convert a class 2 thread-unsafe function into a thread-safe one is
to rewrite it so that it is reentrant. For example, Figure 12.40 shows a reentrant
version of the rand function from Figure 12.37. The key idea is that we have
replaced the static next variable with a pointer that is passed in by the caller.
Is it possible to inspect the code of some function and declare a priori that it is
reentrant? Unfortunately, it depends. If all function arguments are passed by value
(i.e., no pointers) and all data references are to local automatic stack variables (i.e.,
no references to static or global variables), then the function is explicitly reentrant,
in the sense that we can assert its reentrancy regardless of how it is called.
However, if we loosen our assumptions a bit and allow some parameters in
our otherwise explicitly reentrant function to be passed by reference (i.e., we
allow them to pass pointers), then we have an implicitly reentrant function, in
the sense that it is only reentrant if the calling threads are careful to pass pointers
