Section 6.1
Storage Technologies
637
Reads
Writes
Sequential read throughput
550 MB/s
Sequential write throughput
470 MB/s
Random read throughput (IOPS)
89,000 IOPS
Random write throughput (IOPS)
74,000 IOPS
Random read throughput (MB/s)
365 MB/s
Random write throughput (MB/s)
303 MB/s
Avg. sequential read access time
50 μs
Avg. sequential write access time
60 μs
Figure 6.14
Performance characteristics of a commercial solid state disk. Source: Intel SSD 730 product
speciﬁcation [53]. IOPS is I/O operations per second. Throughput numbers are based on reads and writes of
4 KB blocks. (Intel SSD 730 product speciﬁcation. Intel Corporation. 52.)
KB to 512 KB. Data are read and written in units of pages. A page can be written
only after the entire block to which it belongs has been erased (typically, this means
that all bits in the block are set to 1). However, once a block is erased, each page
in the block can be written once with no further erasing. A block wears out after
roughly 100,000 repeated writes. Once a block wears out, it can no longer be used.
Random writes are slower for two reasons. First, erasing a block takes a
relatively long time, on the order of 1 ms, which is more than an order of magnitude
longer than it takes to access a page. Second, if a write operation attempts to
modify a page p that contains existing data (i.e., not all ones), then any pages in
the same block with useful data must be copied to a new (erased) block before
the write to page p can occur. Manufacturers have developed sophisticated logic
in the ﬂash translation layer that attempts to amortize the high cost of erasing
blocks and to minimize the number of internal copies on writes, but it is unlikely
that random writing will ever perform as well as reading.
SSDs have a number of advantages over rotating disks. They are built of
semiconductor memory, with no moving parts, and thus have much faster random
access times than rotating disks, use less power, and are more rugged. However,
there are some disadvantages. First, because ﬂash blocks wear out after repeated
writes, SSDs have the potential to wear out as well. Wear-leveling logic in the ﬂash
translation layer attempts to maximize the lifetime of each block by spreading
erasures evenly across all blocks. In practice, the wear-leveling logic is so good
that it takes many years for SSDs to wear out (see Practice Problem 6.5). Second,
SSDs are about 30 times more expensive per byte than rotating disks, and thus the
typical storage capacities are signiﬁcantly less than rotating disks. However, SSD
prices are decreasing rapidly as they become more popular, and the gap between
the two is decreasing.
SSDs have completely replaced rotating disks in portable music devices, are
popular as disk replacements in laptops, and have even begun to appear in desk-
tops and servers. While rotating disks are here to stay, it is clear that SSDs are an
important alternative.
Practice Problem 6.5 (solution page 698)
As we have seen, a potential drawback of SSDs is that the underlying ﬂash memory
can wear out. For example, for the SSD in Figure 6.14, Intel guarantees about
