Section 6.1
Storage Technologies
623
A programmable ROM (PROM) can be programmed exactly once. PROMs
include a sort of fuse with each memory cell that can be blown once by zapping it
with a high current.
An erasable programmable ROM (EPROM)has a transparent quartz window
that permits light to reach the storage cells. The EPROM cells are cleared to zeros
by shining ultraviolet light through the window. Programming an EPROM is done
by using a special device to write ones into the EPROM. An EPROM can be
erased and reprogrammed on the order of 1,000 times. An electrically erasable
PROM (EEPROM) is akin to an EPROM, but it does not require a physically
separate programming device, and thus can be reprogrammed in-place on printed
circuit cards. An EEPROM can be reprogrammed on the order of 105 times before
it wears out.
Flash memory is a type of nonvolatile memory, based on EEPROMs, that
has become an important storage technology. Flash memories are everywhere,
providing fast and durable nonvolatile storage for a slew of electronic devices,
including digital cameras, cell phones, and music players, as well as laptop, desktop,
and server computer systems. In Section 6.1.3, we will look in detail at a new form
of ﬂash-based disk drive, known as a solid state disk (SSD), that provides a faster,
sturdier, and less power-hungry alternative to conventional rotating disks.
Programs stored in ROM devices are often referred to as ﬁrmware. When a
computer system is powered up, it runs ﬁrmware stored in a ROM. Some systems
provide a small set of primitive input and output functions in ﬁrmware—for
example, a PC’s BIOS (basic input/output system) routines. Complicated devices
such as graphics cards and disk drive controllers also rely on ﬁrmware to translate
I/O (input/output) requests from the CPU.
Accessing Main Memory
Data ﬂows back and forth between the processor and the DRAM main memory
over shared electrical conduits called buses. Each transfer of data between the
CPU and memory is accomplished with a series of steps called a bus transaction.
A read transaction transfers data from the main memory to the CPU. A write
transaction transfers data from the CPU to the main memory.
A bus is a collection of parallel wires that carry address, data, and control
signals. Depending on the particular bus design, data and address signals can share
the same set of wires or can use different sets. Also, more than two devices can
share the same bus. The control wires carry signals that synchronize the transaction
and identify what kind of transaction is currently being performed. For example,
is this transaction of interest to the main memory, or to some other I/O device
such as a disk controller? Is the transaction a read or a write? Is the information
on the bus an address or a data item?
Figure 6.6 shows the conﬁguration of an example computer system. The main
components are the CPU chip, a chipset that we will call an I/O bridge (which
includes the memory controller), and the DRAM memory modules that make up
main memory. These components are connected by a pair of buses: a system bus
that connects the CPU to the I/O bridge, and a memory bus that connects the I/O
