622
Chapter 6
The Memory Hierarchy
CAS. The next three supercells are served directly from the row buffer,
and thus are returned more quickly than the initial supercell.
Extended data out DRAM (EDO DRAM). An enhanced form of FPM
DRAM that allows the individual CAS signals to be spaced closer to-
gether in time.
Synchronous DRAM (SDRAM). Conventional, FPM, and EDO DRAMs are
asynchronous in the sense that they communicate with the memory con-
troller using a set of explicit control signals. SDRAM replaces many of
these control signals with the rising edges of the same external clock sig-
nal that drives the memory controller. Without going into detail, the net
effect is that an SDRAM can output the contents of its supercells at a
faster rate than its asynchronous counterparts.
Double Data-Rate Synchronous DRAM (DDR SDRAM). DDR SDRAM is an
enhancement of SDRAM that doubles the speed of the DRAM by using
both clock edges as control signals. Different types of DDR SDRAMs
are characterized by the size of a small prefetch buffer that increases the
effective bandwidth: DDR (2 bits), DDR2 (4 bits), and DDR3 (8 bits).
Video RAM (VRAM). Used in the frame buffers of graphics systems. VRAM
is similar in spirit to FPM DRAM. Two major differences are that (1)
VRAM output is produced by shifting the entire contents of the internal
buffer in sequence and (2) VRAM allows concurrent reads and writes to
the memory. Thus, the system can be painting the screen with the pixels
in the frame buffer (reads) while concurrently writing new values for the
next update (writes).
Nonvolatile Memory
DRAMs and SRAMs are volatile in the sense that they lose their information if the
supply voltage is turned off. Nonvolatile memories, on the other hand, retain their
information even when they are powered off. There are a variety of nonvolatile
memories. For historical reasons, they are referred to collectively as read-only
memories (ROMs), even though some types of ROMs can be written to as well as
read. ROMs are distinguished by the number of times they can be reprogrammed
(written to) and by the mechanism for reprogramming them.
Aside
Historical popularity of DRAM technologies
Until 1995, most PCs were built with FPM DRAMs. From 1996 to 1999, EDO DRAMs dominated the
market, while FPM DRAMs all but disappeared. SDRAMs ﬁrst appeared in 1995 in high-end systems,
and by 2002 most PCs were built with SDRAMs and DDR SDRAMs. By 2010, most server and desktop
systems were built with DDR3 SDRAMs. In fact, the Intel Core i7 supports only DDR3 SDRAM.
