About the Authors
Randal E. Bryant received his bachelor’s degree from
the University of Michigan in 1973 and then attended
graduate school at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, receiving his PhD degree in computer
science in 1981. He spent three years as an assistant
professor at the California Institute of Technology,
and has been on the faculty at Carnegie Mellon since
1984. For ﬁve of those years he served as head of the
Computer Science Department, and for ten of them
he served as Dean of the School of Computer Science.
He is currently a university professor of computer sci-
ence. He also holds a courtesy appointment with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering.
Professor Bryant has taught courses in computer systems at both the under-
graduate and graduate level for around 40 years. Over many years of teaching
computer architecture courses, he began shifting the focus from how computers
are designed to how programmers can write more efﬁcient and reliable programs
if they understand the system better. Together with Professor O’Hallaron, he de-
veloped the course 15-213, Introduction to Computer Systems, at Carnegie Mellon
that is the basis for this book. He has also taught courses in algorithms, program-
ming, computer networking, distributed systems, and VLSI design.
Most of Professor Bryant’s research concerns the design of software tools
to help software and hardware designers verify the correctness of their systems.
These include several types of simulators, as well as formal veriﬁcation tools that
prove the correctness of a design using mathematical methods. He has published
over 150 technical papers. His research results are used by major computer manu-
facturers, including Intel, IBM, Fujitsu, and Microsoft. He has won several major
awards for his research. These include two inventor recognition awards and a
technical achievement award from the Semiconductor Research Corporation, the
Kanellakis Theory and Practice Award from the Association for Computer Ma-
chinery (ACM), and the W. R. G. Baker Award, the Emmanuel Piore Award, the
Phil Kaufman Award, and the A. Richard Newton Award from the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). He is a fellow of both the ACM and
the IEEE and a member of both the US National Academy of Engineering and
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
35
