1060
Chapter 12
Concurrent Programming
to nonshared data. For example, the rand_r function in Figure 12.40 is implicitly
reentrant.
We always use the term reentrant to include both explicit and implicit re-
entrant functions. However, it is important to realize that reentrancy is sometimes
a property of both the caller and the callee, and not just the callee alone.
Practice Problem 12.12 (solution page 1074)
The rand_r function in Figure 12.40 is implicitly reentrant. Explain.
12.7.3
Using Existing Library Functions in Threaded Programs
Most Linux functions, including the functions deﬁned in the standard C library
(such as malloc, free, realloc, printf, and scanf), are thread-safe, with only
a few exceptions. Figure 12.41 lists some common exceptions. (See [110] for a
complete list.) The strtok function is a deprecated function (one whose use is
discouraged) for parsing strings. The asctime, ctime, and localtime functions
are popular functions for converting back and forth between different time and
date formats. The gethostbyaddr, gethostbyname, and inet_ntoa functions
are obsolete network programming functions that have been replaced by the
reentrant getaddrinfo, getnameinfo, and inet_ntop functions, respectively (see
Chapter 11). With the exceptions of rand and strtok, they are of the class 3 variety
that return a pointer to a static variable. If we need to call one of these functions in
a threaded program, the least disruptive approach to the caller is to lock and copy.
However, the lock-and-copy approach has a number of disadvantages. First, the
additional synchronization slows down the program. Second, functions that return
pointers to complex structures of structures require a deep copy of the structures
in order to copy the entire structure hierarchy. Third, the lock-and-copy approach
will not work for a class 2 thread-unsafe function such as rand that relies on static
state across calls.
Thread-unsafe function
Thread-unsafe class
Linux thread-safe version
rand
2
rand_r
strtok
2
strtok_r
asctime
3
asctime_r
ctime
3
ctime_r
gethostbyaddr
3
gethostbyaddr_r
gethostbyname
3
gethostbyname_r
inet_ntoa
3
(none)
localtime
3
localtime_r
Figure 12.41
Common thread-unsafe library functions.
