800
Chapter 8
Exceptional Control Flow
(4) Control passes
to handler T
(1) Program
catches signal s
(3) Program
catches signal t
(7) Main program
resumes
(5) Handler T 
returns to 
handler S
(2) Control passes
to handler S
Main program
Handler S
Handler T
(6) Handler S returns
to main program
Icurr
Inext
Figure 8.31
Handlers can be interrupted by other handlers.
is to immediately terminate the process. In this example, we modify the default
behavior to catch the signal, print a message, and then terminate the process.
Signal handlers can be interrupted by other handlers, as shown in Figure 8.31.
In this example, the main program catches signal s, which interrupts the main
program and transfers control to handler S. While S is running, the program
catches signal t ̸= s, which interrupts S and transfers control to handler T . When
T returns, S resumes where it was interrupted. Eventually, S returns, transferring
control back to the main program, which resumes where it left off.
Practice Problem 8.7 (solution page 834)
Write a program called snooze that takes a single command-line argument, calls
the snooze function from Problem 8.5 with this argument, and then terminates.
Write your program so that the user can interrupt the snooze function by typing
Ctrl+C at the keyboard. For example:
linux> ./snooze 5
CTRL+C
User hits Crtl+C after 3 seconds
Slept for 3 of 5 secs.
linux>
8.5.4
Blocking and Unblocking Signals
Linux provides implicit and explicit mechanisms for blocking signals:
Implicit blocking mechanism. By default, the kernel blocks any pending sig-
nals of the type currently being processed by a handler. For example, in
Figure 8.31, suppose the program has caught signal s and is currently run-
ning handler S. If another signal s is sent to the process, then s will become
pending but will not be received until after handler S returns.
Explicit blocking mechanism. Applications can explicitly block and unblock
selected signals using the sigprocmask function and its helpers.
