Section 1.9
Important Themes
59
Aside
Expressing relative performance
The best way to express a performance improvement is as a ratio of the form Told/Tnew, where Told is
the time required for the original version and Tnew is the time required by the modiﬁed version. This
will be a number greater than 1.0 if any real improvement occurred. We use the sufﬁx ‘×’ to indicate
such a ratio, where the factor “2.2×” is expressed verbally as “2.2 times.”
The more traditional way of expressing relative change as a percentage works well when the
change is small, but its deﬁnition is ambiguous. Should it be 100 . (Told −Tnew)/Tnew, or possibly
100 . (Told −Tnew)/Told, or something else? In addition, it is less instructive for large changes. Saying
that “performance improved by 120%” is more difﬁcult to comprehend than simply saying that the
performance improved by 2.2×.
A. You hear on the news that Montana has just abolished its speed limit, which
constitutes 1,500 km of the trip. Your truck can travel at 150 km/hr. What
will be your speedup for the trip?
B. You can buy a new turbocharger for your truck at www.fasttrucks.com. They
stock a variety of models, but the faster you want to go, the more it will cost.
How fast must you travel through Montana to get an overall speedup for
your trip of 1.67×?
Practice Problem 1.2 (solution page 64)
A car manufacturing company has promised their customers that the next release
of a new engine will show a 4× performance improvement. You have been as-
signed the task of delivering on that promise. You have determined that only 90%
of the engine can be improved. How much (i.e., what value of k) would you need
to improve this part to meet the overall performance target of the engine?
One interesting special case of Amdahl’s law is to consider the effect of setting
k to ∞. That is, we are able to take some part of the system and speed it up to the
point at which it takes a negligible amount of time. We then get
S∞=
1
(1 −α)
(1.2)
So, for example, if we can speed up 60% of the system to the point where it requires
close to no time, our net speedup will still only be 1/0.4 = 2.5×.
Amdahl’s law describes a general principle for improving any process. In
addition to its application to speeding up computer systems, it can guide a company
trying to reduce the cost of manufacturing razor blades, or a student trying to
improve his or her grade point average. Perhaps it is most meaningful in the world
