32
Preface
Thanks also to our readers who have contributed to the labs, including God-
mar Back (Virginia Tech), Taymon Beal (Worcester Polytechnic Institute), Aran
Clauson (Western Washington University), Cary Gray (Wheaton College), Paul
Haiduk (West Texas A&M University), Len Hamey (Macquarie University), Ed-
die Kohler (Harvard), Hugh Lauer (Worcester Polytechnic Institute), Robert
Marmorstein (Longwood University), and James Riely (DePaul University).
Once again, Paul Anagnostopoulos of Windfall Software did a masterful job
of typesetting the book and leading the production process. Many thanks to Paul
and his stellar team: Richard Camp (copyediting), Jennifer McClain (proofread-
ing), Laurel Muller (art production), and Ted Laux (indexing). Paul even spotted
a bug in our description of the origins of the acronym BSS that had persisted
undetected since the ﬁrst edition!
Finally, we would like to thank our friends at Prentice Hall. Marcia Horton
and our editor, Matt Goldstein, have been unﬂagging in their support and encour-
agement, and we are deeply grateful to them.
Acknowledgments from the Second Edition
We are deeply grateful to the many people who have helped us produce this second
edition of the CS:APP text.
First and foremost, we would like to recognize our colleagues who have taught
the ICS course at Carnegie Mellon for their insightful feedback and encourage-
ment: Guy Blelloch, Roger Dannenberg, David Eckhardt, Greg Ganger, Seth
Goldstein, Greg Kesden, Bruce Maggs, Todd Mowry, Andreas Nowatzyk, Frank
Pfenning, and Markus Pueschel.
Thanks also to our sharp-eyed readers who contributed reports to the errata
page for the ﬁrst edition: Daniel Amelang, Rui Baptista, Quarup Barreirinhas,
Michael Bombyk, J¨
org Brauer, Jordan Brough, Yixin Cao, James Caroll, Rui Car-
valho, Hyoung-Kee Choi, Al Davis, Grant Davis, Christian Dufour, Mao Fan,
Tim Freeman, Inge Frick, Max Gebhardt, Jeff Goldblat, Thomas Gross, Anita
Gupta, John Hampton, Hiep Hong, Greg Israelsen, Ronald Jones, Haudy Kazemi,
Brian Kell, Constantine Kousoulis, Sacha Krakowiak, Arun Krishnaswamy, Mar-
tin Kulas, Michael Li, Zeyang Li, Ricky Liu, Mario Lo Conte, Dirk Maas, Devon
Macey, Carl Marcinik, Will Marrero, Simone Martins, Tao Men, Mark Morris-
sey, Venkata Naidu, Bhas Nalabothula, Thomas Niemann, Eric Peskin, David Po,
Anne Rogers, John Ross, Michael Scott, Seiki, Ray Shih, Darren Shultz, Erik
Silkensen, Suryanto, Emil Tarazi, Nawanan Theera-Ampornpunt, Joe Trdinich,
Michael Trigoboff, James Troup, Martin Vopatek, Alan West, Betsy Wolff, Tim
Wong, James Woodruff, Scott Wright, Jackie Xiao, Guanpeng Xu, Qing Xu, Caren
Yang, Yin Yongsheng, Wang Yuanxuan, Steven Zhang, and Day Zhong. Special
thanks to Inge Frick, who identiﬁed a subtle deep copy bug in our lock-and-copy
example, and to Ricky Liu for his amazing proofreading skills.
Our Intel Labs colleagues Andrew Chien and Limor Fix were exceptionally
supportive throughout the writing of the text. Steve Schlosser graciously provided
some disk drive characterizations. Casey Helfrich and Michael Ryan installed
