Section 6.1
Storage Technologies
627
Tracks
(a) Single-platter view
Track k
Gaps
Surface
Spindle
Sectors
(b) Multiple-platter view
Cylinder k
Platter 0
Surface 0
Surface 1
Surface 2
Platter 1
Platter 2
Spindle
Surface 3
Surface 4
Surface 5
Figure 6.9
Disk geometry.
A disk consists of one or more platters stacked on top of each other and
encased in a sealed package, as shown in Figure 6.9(b). The entire assembly is
often referred to as a disk drive, although we will usually refer to it as simply a
disk. We will sometimes refer to disks as rotating disks to distinguish them from
ﬂash-based solid state disks (SSDs), which have no moving parts.
Disk manufacturers describe the geometry of multiple-platter drives in terms
of cylinders, where a cylinder is the collection of tracks on all the surfaces that are
equidistant from the center of the spindle. For example, if a drive has three platters
and six surfaces, and the tracks on each surface are numbered consistently, then
cylinder k is the collection of the six instances of track k.
Disk Capacity
The maximum number of bits that can be recorded by a disk is known as its max-
imum capacity, or simply capacity. Disk capacity is determined by the following
technology factors:
Recording density (bits/in). The number of bits that can be squeezed into a 1-
inch segment of a track.
Track density (tracks/in). The number of tracks that can be squeezed into a
1-inch segment of the radius extending from the center of the platter.
Areal density (bits/in2). The product of the recording density and the track
density.
Disk manufacturers work tirelessly to increase areal density (and thus capac-
ity), and this is doubling every couple of years. The original disks, designed in
an age of low areal density, partitioned every track into the same number of sec-
tors, which was determined by the number of sectors that could be recorded on
the innermost track. To maintain a ﬁxed number of sectors per track, the sectors
were spaced farther apart on the outer tracks. This was a reasonable approach
