Section 9.9
Dynamic Memory Allocation
883
size bytes, malloc would save the current value of p on the stack, increment p by
size, and return the old value of p to the caller. Free would simply return to the
caller without doing anything.
This naive allocator is an extreme point in the design space. Since each malloc
and free execute only a handful of instructions, throughput would be extremely
good. However, since the allocator never reuses any blocks, memory utilization
would be extremely bad. A practical allocator that strikes a better balance between
throughput and utilization must consider the following issues:
Free block organization. How do we keep track of free blocks?
Placement. How do we choose an appropriate free block in which to place a
newly allocated block?
Splitting. After we place a newly allocated block in some free block, what do
we do with the remainder of the free block?
Coalescing. What do we do with a block that has just been freed?
The rest of this section looks at these issues in more detail. Since the basic
techniques of placement, splitting, and coalescing cut across many different free
block organizations, we will introduce them in the context of a simple free block
organization known as an implicit free list.
9.9.6
Implicit Free Lists
Any practical allocator needs some data structure that allows it to distinguish
block boundaries and to distinguish between allocated and free blocks. Most
allocators embed this information in the blocks themselves. One simple approach
is shown in Figure 9.35.
In this case, a block consists of a one-word header, the payload, and possibly
some additional padding. The header encodes the block size (including the header
and any padding) as well as whether the block is allocated or free. If we impose a
double-word alignment constraint, then the block size is always a multiple of 8 and
the 3 low-order bits of the block size are always zero. Thus, we need to store only
the 29 high-order bits of the block size, freeing the remaining 3 bits to encode
other information. In this case, we are using the least signiﬁcant of these bits
Figure 9.35
Format of a simple heap
block.
Header
Block size
Payload
(allocated block only)
Padding (optional)
0 0 a
The block size includes
the header, payload, and
any padding
a = 1: Allocated
a = 0: Free
malloc returns a
pointer to the beginning
of the payload
31
3 2 1 0
