Section 11.5
Web Servers
985
Aside
Origins of the World Wide Web
The World Wide Web was invented by Tim Berners-Lee, a software engineer working at CERN, a Swiss
physics lab. In 1989, Berners-Lee wrote an internal memo proposing a distributed hypertext system
that would connect a “web of notes with links.” The intent of the proposed system was to help CERN
scientists share and manage information. Over the next two years, after Berners-Lee implemented
the ﬁrst Web server and Web browser, the Web developed a small following within CERN and a few
other sites. A pivotal event occurred in 1993, when Marc Andreesen (who later founded Netscape and
Andreessen Horowitz) and his colleagues at NCSA released a graphical browser called mosaic for all
three major platforms: Linux, Windows, and Macintosh. After the release of mosaic, interest in the
Web exploded, with the number of Web sites increasing at an exponential rate. By 2015, there were
over 975,000,000 sites worldwide. (Source: Netcraft Web Survey)
MIME type
Description
text/html
HTML page
text/plain
Unformatted text
application/postscript
Postscript document
image/gif
Binary image encoded in GIF format
image/png
Binary image encoded in PNG format
image/jpeg
Binary image encoded in JPEG format
Figure 11.23
Example MIME types.
11.5.2
Web Content
To Web clients and servers, content is a sequence of bytes with an associated MIME
(multipurpose internet mail extensions) type. Figure 11.23 shows some common
MIME types.
Web servers provide content to clients in two different ways:
. Fetch a disk ﬁle and return its contents to the client. The disk ﬁle is known
as static content and the process of returning the ﬁle to the client is known as
serving static content.
. Run an executable ﬁle and return its output to the client. The output produced
by the executable at run time is known as dynamic content, and the process of
running the program and returning its output to the client is known as serving
dynamic content.
Every piece of content returned by a Web server is associated with some ﬁle
that it manages. Each of these ﬁles has a unique name known as a URL (universal
resource locator). For example, the URL
http://www.google.com:80/index.html
