Preface
21
code/intro/hello.c
1
#include <stdio.h>
2
3
int main()
4
{
5
printf("hello, world\n");
6
return 0;
7
}
code/intro/hello.c
Figure 1
A typical code example.
immediately to test your understanding. Solutions to the practice problems are
at the end of each chapter. As you read, try to solve each problem on your own
and then check the solution to make sure you are on the right track. Each chapter
is followed by a set of homework problems of varying difﬁculty. Your instructor
has the solutions to the homework problems in an instructor’s manual. For each
homework problem, we show a rating of the amount of effort we feel it will require:
◆Should require just a few minutes. Little or no programming required.
◆◆Might require up to 20 minutes. Often involves writing and testing some
code. (Many of these are derived from problems we have given on exams.)
◆◆◆Requires a signiﬁcant effort, perhaps 1–2 hours. Generally involves writ-
ing and testing a signiﬁcant amount of code.
◆◆◆◆A lab assignment, requiring up to 10 hours of effort.
Each code example in the text was formatted directly, without any manual
intervention, from a C program compiled with gcc and tested on a Linux system.
Of course, your system may have a different version of gcc, or a different compiler
altogether, so your compiler might generate different machine code; but the
overall behavior should be the same. All of the source code is available from the
CS:APP Web page (“CS:APP” being our shorthand for the book’s title) at csapp
.cs.cmu.edu. In the text, the ﬁlenames of the source programs are documented
in horizontal bars that surround the formatted code. For example, the program in
Figure 1 can be found in the ﬁle hello.c in directory code/intro/. We encourage
you to try running the example programs on your system as you encounter them.
To avoid having a book that is overwhelming, both in bulk and in content, we
have created a number of Web asides containing material that supplements the
main presentation of the book. These asides are referenced within the book with
a notation of the form chap:top, where chap is a short encoding of the chapter sub-
ject, and top is a short code for the topic that is covered. For example, Web Aside
data:bool contains supplementary material on Boolean algebra for the presenta-
tion on data representations in Chapter 2, while Web Aside arch:vlog contains
