764
Chapter 8
Exceptional Control Flow
Figure 8.7
Fault handling.
Depending on whether the
fault can be repaired or
not, the fault handler either
re-executes the faulting
instruction or aborts.
(2) Control passes
to handler
(3) Fault
handler runs
(4) Handler either re-executes
current instruction or aborts
(1) Current
instruction
causes a fault
Icurr
abort
Figure 8.8
Abort handling. The abort
handler passes control to a
kernel abort routine that
terminates the application
program.
(2) Control passes
to handler
(3) Abort
handler runs
(4) Handler returns
to abort routine
(1) Fatal hardware
error occurs
Icurr
abort
run in user mode, which restricts the types of instructions they can execute, and
they access the same stack as the calling function. A system call runs in kernel
mode, which allows it to execute privileged instructions and access a stack deﬁned
in the kernel. Section 8.2.4 discusses user and kernel modes in more detail.
Faults
Faults result from error conditions that a handler might be able to correct. When
a fault occurs, the processor transfers control to the fault handler. If the handler
is able to correct the error condition, it returns control to the faulting instruction,
thereby re-executing it. Otherwise, the handler returns to an abort routine in the
kernel that terminates the application program that caused the fault. Figure 8.7
summarizes the processing for a fault.
A classic example of a fault is the page fault exception, which occurs when
an instruction references a virtual address whose corresponding page is not res-
ident in memory and must therefore be retrieved from disk. As we will see in
Chapter 9, a page is a contiguous block (typically 4 KB) of virtual memory. The
page fault handler loads the appropriate page from disk and then returns control
to the instruction that caused the fault. When the instruction executes again, the
appropriate page is now resident in memory and the instruction is able to run to
completion without faulting.
Aborts
Aborts result from unrecoverable fatal errors, typically hardware errors such
as parity errors that occur when DRAM or SRAM bits are corrupted. Abort
handlers never return control to the application program. As shown in Figure 8.8,
the handler returns control to an abort routine that terminates the application
program.
