34
Preface
and answered our questions on modern disks. Tom Stricker showed us the mem-
ory mountain. James Hoe provided useful ideas and feedback on how to present
processor architecture.
A special group of students—Khalil Amiri, Angela Demke Brown, Chris
Colohan, Jason Crawford, Peter Dinda, Julio Lopez, Bruce Lowekamp, Jeff
Pierce, Sanjay Rao, Balaji Sarpeshkar, Blake Scholl, Sanjit Seshia, Greg Stef-
fan, Tiankai Tu, Kip Walker, and Yinglian Xie—were instrumental in helping
us develop the content of the course. In particular, Chris Colohan established a
fun (and funny) tone that persists to this day, and invented the legendary “binary
bomb” that has proven to be a great tool for teaching machine code and debugging
concepts.
Chris Bauer, Alan Cox, Peter Dinda, Sandhya Dwarkadas, John Greiner,
Don Heller, Bruce Jacob, Barry Johnson, Bruce Lowekamp, Greg Morrisett,
Brian Noble, Bobbie Othmer, Bill Pugh, Michael Scott, Mark Smotherman, Greg
Steffan, and Bob Wier took time that they did not have to read and advise us
on early drafts of the book. A very special thanks to Al Davis (University of
Utah), Peter Dinda (Northwestern University), John Greiner (Rice University),
Wei Hsu (University of Minnesota), Bruce Lowekamp (College of William &
Mary), Bobbie Othmer (University of Minnesota), Michael Scott (University of
Rochester), and Bob Wier (Rocky Mountain College) for class testing the beta
version. A special thanks to their students as well!
We would also like to thank our colleagues at Prentice Hall. Marcia Horton,
Eric Frank, and Harold Stone have been unﬂagging in their support and vision.
Harold also helped us present an accurate historical perspective on RISC and
CISC processor architectures. Jerry Ralya provided sharp insights and taught us
a lot about good writing.
Finally, we would like to acknowledge the great technical writers Brian
Kernighan and the late W. Richard Stevens, for showing us that technical books
can be beautiful.
Thank you all.
Randy Bryant
Dave O’Hallaron
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Pearson would like to thank and acknowledge Chetan Venkatesh, MS Ramaiah
Institute of Technology, Desny Antony, Don Bosco College, and Chitra Dhawale,
SP College, for reviewing the Global Edition.
